# 10: React 1

If you get stuck, a completed version of this project is available in the **10-react-1** directory of the **lecture-notes** repository.

## Vite

**Vite** is a build tool that is used to create **React** applications. It is similar to **Create React App**, but it is faster and has a few other advantages.

## Create Vite App

1. In the **Terminal**, the following command:

```bash
npm create vite@latest
```

2. Name the project **10-react-1**, select **React** as the framework and select **JavaScript + SWC** as the variant.

3. Change into the project directory and install the dependencies:

```bash
cd 10-react-1
npm install
```

4. Start the development server:

```bash
npm run dev
```

If you try to run the development server before installing the dependencies, you will get an error.

5. Navigate to **http://127.0.0.1:5173/** in your browser.

You should see a page that says **Vite + React**

## Hot Module Replacement

**Hot Module Replacement** is a feature of **Vite** that allows you to see changes to your application without having to refresh the browser.

## Rollup

**Rollup** is a module bundler that is used by **Vite** to bundle your application for production.

## Directory Structure

- `node_modules` - Contains the dependencies for the project.

- `public` - Contains static assets that you want to include in your project.

- `src` - The heart of your project. This is where you will structure your project and write components.

- `.eslintrc.js` - The configuration file for **ESLint**. **ESLint** is a tool that is used to enforce code quality and style rules.

- `.gitignore` - A file that tells **Git** which files and directories to ignore.

- `index.html` - The entry point for your application.

- `package-lock.json` - A file that contains information about your project's dependencies. This file is automatically generated by **npm**.

- `package.json` - A file that contains information about your project and its dependencies.

- `README.md` - A file that contains information about your project.

- `vite.config.js` - A file that contains configuration information for **Vite**.

## JSX

Open the `App.jsx` file in the `src`. This is called **JSX** or **JavaScript XML**. It is a syntax extension to JavaScript that allows you to write HTML-like code in your JavaScript files.

## Components

**Components** are the building blocks of **React** applications. They are reusable pieces of code that can be used to build user interfaces.

`App.jsx` is a component. It is a function that returns **JSX**.

Let us create a new component.

In the `src` directory, create a new directory called `components`. In the `components` directory, create a new file called `MyFirstComponent.jsx`.

In `MyFirstComponent.jsx`, add the following code:

```jsx
const MyFirstComponent = () => {
  return <h1>Hello, World!</h1>;
};

export default MyFirstComponent;
```

In `App.jsx`, replace the existing code with the following:

```jsx
import MyFirstComponent from "./MyFirstComponent";

const App = () => {
  return <MyFirstComponent />;
};

export default App;
```

Navigate to **http://127.0.0.1:5173/** in your browser.

You should see **Hello, World!** on the page.

## Props

**Props** are used to pass data from one component to another.

In `MyFirstComponent.jsx`, replace the existing code with the following:

```jsx
const MyFirstComponent = (props) => {
  return <h1>Hello, {props.name}!</h1>;
};

export default MyFirstComponent;
```

In `App.jsx`, replace the existing code with the following:

```jsx
import MyFirstComponent from "./MyFirstComponent";

const App = () => {
  return <MyFirstComponent name="Jeff" />;
};

export default App;
```

Navigate to **http://127.0.0.1:5173/** in your browser.

You should see **Hello, Jeff!** on the page.

## State

**State** is used to store data that can change over time.

In `App.jsx`, replace the existing code with the following:

```jsx
import { useState } from "react";

import MyFirstComponent from "./MyFirstComponent";

const App = () => {
  const [name, setName] = useState("Jeff");

  return <MyFirstComponent name={name} />;
};

export default App;
```

## Reconciliation

**React** uses a process called **reconciliation** to update the DOM when the state of a component changes.

## Virtual DOM

**React** uses a **virtual DOM** to keep track of the state of the DOM. When the state of a component changes, **React** updates the virtual DOM and then uses **reconciliation** to update the DOM. This is much faster than updating the DOM directly.

## Lifecycle

**React** components have a lifecycle. The lifecycle consists of three phases:

- **Mounting** - The component is created and inserted into the DOM.

- **Updating** - The component is updated when its state or props change.

- **Unmounting** - The component is removed from the DOM.

## Formative Assessment

If you get stuck on any of the following tasks, feel free to use **ChatGPT** permitting, you are aware of the following:

- If you provide **ChatGPT** with a prompt that is not refined enough, it may generate a not-so-useful response
- Do not trust **ChatGPT's** responses blindly. You must still use your judgement and may need to do additional research to determine if the response is correct
- Acknowledge that you are using **ChatGPT**. In the **README.md** file, please include what prompt(s) you provided to **ChatGPT** and how you used the response(s) to help you with your work

